[Note: The following text was prepared by Barry Schlesinger (FITS
Hotline person at GSFC-NOST) as part of a comparison of various data
formats which is being produced by NOST. This text is a *draft*. NOST
has given me permission to place it in this archive.  -Don Wells]

From: BSCHLESINGER@NSSDCA.GSFC.NASA.GOV
To: dwells@cv3.CV.NRAO.EDU
Subject: Draft FITS Section for Formats Comparison Booklet
Date:    Thu, 7 May 1992 11:48:58 -0400 (EDT)

---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     DRAFT

                        FLEXIBLE IMAGE TRANSPORT SYSTEM

Purpose
        The Flexible Image Transport System (FITS) was developed by
astronomers to be the standard format for data transport between
installations.  Because each installation would have its own internal format,
new software had to be written each time an particular user or group
wished to transfer data to or from a new installation.  Developing a
standard transport format reduces the effort needed for data transport:
each installation needs only one software package to convert from its
format to the standard transport format and from the standard transport
format to its own internal format.  The original application was for digital
images (hence the name, "Image"), but even at the time of origin, other
applications were envisioned, and provision was made to allow them, hence
the term, "Flexible". 

Targeted user community and sponsoring organization
        FITS is endorsed by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) as
the standard format for data transport in the astronomical community. 
Code SZ at NASA headquarters has instructed that all projects under Code
SZ or supported by it must make their data available in FITS format. 
Other user communities may choose to adopt FITS or use some of the
features of FITS in developing their own format.  The IAU has established
a Working Group to oversee the definition and development of the FITS
standard. 

Conceptual model
        The basic component in FITS is the file, a byte stream ending with
a logical end-of-file marker appropriate to the medium.  A FITS file is
comprised of a sequence of Header and Data Units (HDUs).  Each HDU
consists of a header made up of card images containing keyword=value
statements in printable ASCII, describing the format and structure of its
data, which immediately follow.  A number of different formats are possible
for the data, but all of these formats can be mapped in some way to an
array of one or more dimensions.  An HDU may consist only of a header,
without data.  

Relation to physical media
        A FITS file is a purely logical structure.  Because it was originally
developed for tape, much of the early literature describes FITS in that
context. Medium-specific references are being removed from the standard,
and conventions are being developed for individual media.  

Platforms supported and portability
        FITS is designed and intended to be usable on any hardware.  A
FITS file can be transported either on a physical unit, such as tape or disk,
or electronically, as befits a format designed for data transport.  Machine-
specific FITS software may be needed to translate between FITS format and
the data encoding native to a particular machine.
        
User view
        To the user, FITS presents a data file with a prescribed overall
format -- a sequence of HDUs with a number of possible formats.
        The header of the first or primary HDU, the primary header, is
always present.  There need not be data in this HDU, but if there are, they
must be in the form of an array of 1 to 999 dimensions, called the primary
data array. Values in this array must be in one a selected group of binary
formats. Values for required keywords in the header describe the properties
of the array: the number of axes, the length of each, and the data type of the
members.  
        The primary HDU may be followed by a set of additional HDUs
called extensions.  A keyword in the primary header tells the reader
whether or not extensions may be present in the file.            One extension
type, ASCII Tables, has been endorsed as standard by the IAU FITS
Working Group. In this structure, a two-dimensional matrix of bytes is
mapped into a table whose entries are composed of printable ASCII
characters.  
        As FITS evolves, other types of extensions may be endorsed as
standard in the future.

Functions and flexibility
        The principal use of FITS remains that for which it was originally
designed, transport of data between installations.  A natural extension of
this purpose is data archiving.  If a data archive uses its own special
format, then most users, who do not use that format, must write software
to translate between the archive format and theirs.  If the archival data are
in standard format, the users may use standard software developed to
handle that format.  
        The primary data array is most obviously suitable for digital images;
however, other data that map into an array or image can also be
transported by a primary data array.  One example is a spectrum, which
maps into an image where one axis is wavelength and the other the tracking
axis.  Labels and scales for the axes can be specified by standard but
optional keywords in the primary header.
        The ASCII Tables format provides a method to package additional
information about an image in the primary data array in the same file. It
can also be used to distribute catalogues in FITS format.  Keywords
reserved to the extension type allow the user to define the number, content,
and size of the fields in the table.
        FITS provides for data structures that cannot be represented by a
simple array or ASCII tables by allowing users to create new types of
extensions.   A type name in the header identifies the structure of each
extension, and keywords in the header of each extension provide the size
of the data following. Extensions of different types may appear in a file in
any order.  A program that reads FITS files can use the type name and size
information to identify and skip over extensions in a FITS file that it is not
equipped to handle.  An extension type name may be used for only one
structure; names must be registered with the IAU FITS Working Group.  
        Standard FITS keywords allow the user to describe the origin and
history of the data set and the material it contains.  In addition, users may
define their own keywords to furnish additional metadata and information
such as instrument status.      
        
Misapplications
        Because of the "Image" in the name, FITS is sometimes incorrectly
thought of as an image display format, in which the contents are stored in
a way that allows easy conversion of the pixel values to screen greyscale or
color, through the use of a viewer.  While the primary data array may
represent an image, it need not.  Even if it does, software must be obtained
to convert the FITS values to a form that can be displayed.  Thus, FITS is
not necessarily the best way to transport images that are designed
exclusively for display.

Incorporated software
        No software is incorporated as part of the definition of FITS. 
Installations must develop their own software to read and write FITS or
must obtain one of the independently developed packages described in the
next section.  The NASA/OSSA Office of Standards and Technology (NOST)
FITS Support Office is developing a FITS Product Conformance Tester,
which will read files and check their conformance to the NOST Standard. 
At present, a test prototype that can check required keywords in the
primary data array and list sample members of the array is available on
request for user testing. 
 
Other utilities
        The major astronomical image analysis packages -- AIPS
(Astronomical Image Processing System), supported by the National Radio
Astronomy observatory; IRAF (Image Reduction and Analysis Facility),
supported by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories and ESO-
MIDAS (Munich Image Data Analysis System), supported by the European
Southern Observatory -- all have the capability to read FITS files, but the
FITS software is not separable from the rest of the package.  The portable
bitmap plus package can convert some FITS files into GIF format; more
general capabilities claimed for recent upgrades have not been confirmed. 
A few software packages have been made available to the public.  W. Pence
of HEASARC has developed a set of FITS reading and writing routines in
FORTRAN called FITSIO.  These routines must be incorporated by the user
into more general software to process the file in question.  Software in C to
read and list the headers of a FITS file is available from the NOST FITS
Support Office.  Sample FITS data sets are available by anonymous ftp from
fits.cx.nrao.edu, in the directory \FITS\TestFiles (case is significant).  The
Astronomical Data Center has developed a FITS Tables Browser, which can
be used to read the catalogue CD-ROM described below.

How it is used
        A user may receive FITS file in many ways: tape, diskette, or
electronic transfer.  For tape or disk data sets, some information on
physical blocking should be provided along with the physical data set.  It
will usually be easier for the user if the first step is to determine the
contents of the file by listing the contents of the header, using a program
like that written by the FITS Support Office.  For reading FITS files, each
installation will have established some software package as standard for its
use, either one associated with one of the major astronomical image
analysis packages, another widely distributed package such as FITSIO, or
a locally developed FITS writer.  Local software will be used along with the
FITS reader to convert in a convenient form for display or printout.  If there
is a standard local data storage format, the FITS file may be converted to
that format.   Local utility software can then be used with the converted
data.
        The process of writing FITS files is the reverse.  If an existing data
set is to be converted to FITS, a locally developed package is used to create
the file or provide input to one of the standard packages.  Using an
appropriate FITS writer, it is also possible to create a new data set on FITS
format.  The new FITS data set may be tape, disk, or an electronic file.

Representative Applications
        The original application of FITS was to transport digital images. 
Images in a wide variety of wavelengths have been transported: near
ultraviolet, optical, infrared, and radio.  FITS has also been used to
transport the results of interferometry measurements.  A CD-ROM produced
by the NSSDC Astronomical Data Center uses the ASCII Tables format
extensively to store a large number of catalogues.  This format is also often
use to hold an observing log accompanying an image.  In this application,
the primary HDU would hold the image and an ASCII table extension would
contain the observing log.

Evolutionary process
         A proposal for a new extension type or other refinement to FITS
generally originates when the developer of a data set finds that the data can
not reasonably fit into an existing standard or proposed FITS format.  The
designer develops a concept for the new format, chooses a name for the
extension type, and registers the name with the IAU FITS Working Group. 
If the format appears to potentially have broader applications, the designer
develops a formal proposal for a new standard extension, often discussing
design issues with others interested in the format.  This proposal is
distributed for review by the astronomical community.  Tests must be run
using the proposed format to confirm that it can actually be used for data
transport.  After the community has reviewed the proposal, any
modifications have been made, and the format has been successfully used
for data transport, the proposal is submitted for approval to the regional
committees -- the European FITS Committee and the North American
committee under the American Astronomical Society Working Group on
Astronomical Software.  Following approval by the regional committees, it
is submitted to the IAU FITS Working Group.  Approval by the Working
Group establishes it as a standard extension.

Current directions of evolution
        A binary tables extension is currently being proposed for
endorsement as a standard extension.  Like the ASCII Tables extension, the
two dimensional matrix is viewed as a table; however, the individual fields
are in binary, rather than FORTRAN format.  In addition an individual table
field may be a vector or multidimensional matrix, not simply a single
number. Binary tables are expected to be widely used once adopted,
particularly in the field of high energy astrophysics, as in the Compton GRO
results, where the data are typically an event list. 
        Another proposed extension type would provide for simple images
or data arrays, like the contents of the primary data array, to appear in
extensions.
        Additional areas under discussion include compression, bit streams,
and an extension for use in some media to represent the tape end of file
mark. 

User support
        A FITS Support Office has been established under the NOST.  This
office answers queries on specific FITS topics, provides copies of some
documents, and furnishes references for others.  The office is also
developing some FITS software. The NOST FITS Support Office maintains
an anonymous ftp directory (FITS) on nssdca.gsfc.nasa.gov including copies
of some FITS documents, the current list of extension type names registered
with the IAU, the software developed by the FITS Support Office to read and
list FITS headers, and a list of FITS software packages whose developers
have made them publicly available.  
        The best way to remain aware of current developments in FITS is
electronically.  New FITS documents, software, and extension proposals are
announced on an electronic mail exploder fitsbits@fits.cx.nrao.edu, tied to
the sci.astro.fits USEnet newsgroup.  This exploder/newsgroup also serves
as the forum for discussion of FITS proposals, practices, and controversies. 
